guides/joining-data-in-python.md, before:

---
title: Joining Data
---

Joining multiple datasets on a common value or set of values is a
common data wrangling task.  For instance, one might have a dataset
listing Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per country and a separate
dataset containing geographic outlines of country borders.  If these
independent datasets have a shared property (for instance, the
three-letter country code as
[defined in ISO 3166-1](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_3166-1_alpha-3)),
we should be able to create one consolidated dataset to generate a map
of GDP per country.  This guide will walk through this simple use
case.

## Example Data

For this example, we are going to use two example Data Packages from
our
[example data packages repository](https://github.com/frictionlessdata/example-data-packages/)
with the properties described above.  The first is an example of Data
Package containing a GeoJSON file.  [GeoJSON](http://geojson.org/) is
a format for representing geographical features in
[JSON](http://json.org/).  This particular GeoJSON file lists
countries on its `features` array and specifies the country code as a
property on each "feature".  In this case, the country code is stored
on the key "ISO_A3" of the feature's `properties` object.

{% highlight json %}
{
  "type": "FeatureCollection",
  "features": [
    {
      "type": "Feature",
      "properties": {
        "ADMIN": "Ukraine",
        "ISO_A3": "UKR"
      },
      "geometry": {
        "type": "Polygon",
        "coordinates": [
        ...
        ]
      }
    }
  ]
}
{% endhighlight %}

The second Data Package is a typical
[Tabular Data Package](/guides/tabular-data-package/) containing a GDP
measure for each country in the world for the year 2014.  Country
codes are stored, naturally, on the "Country Code" column.

|  Country Name                                   | Country Code | Year | Value             |
|-------------------------------------------------+--------------+------+-------------------|
|  Ukraine                                        | UKR          | 2014 | 131805126738.287  |
|  United Arab Emirates                           | ARE          | 2014 | 401646583173.427  |
|  United Kingdom                                 | GBR          | 2014 | 2941885537461.48  |
|  United States                                  | USA          | 2014 | 17419000000000    |
|  Uruguay                                        | URY          | 2014 | 57471277325.1312  |

## Reading and Joining Data 

As in our
[Using Data Packages in Python guide](/guides/using-data-packages-in-python),
the first step before joining is to read the data for each Data
Package onto our computer.  We do this by importing the `datapackage`
library and passing the Data Package url to its `DataPackage` method.
We are also importing the standard Python `json` library to read and
write our GeoJSON file.

{% highlight python %}
import json
import datapackage

countries_url = 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/frictionlessdata/example-data-packages/master/geo-countries/datapackage.json'
gdp_url = 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/frictionlessdata/example-data-packages/master/gross-domestic-product-2014/datapackage.json'

countries_dp = datapackage.DataPackage(countries_url)
gdp_dp = datapackage.DataPackage(gdp_url)
{% endhighlight %}

Our GeoJSON data is stored as a `bytes` object in the `data` attribute
of the first (and only) element of the Data Package `resources` array.
To create our `world` GeoJSON dict, we first need to decode this
`bytes` object to a UTF-8 string and pass it to `json.loads`.

{% highlight python %}
world = json.loads(countries_dp.resources[0].data.decode('utf-8'))
{% endhighlight %}

At this point, joining the data can be accomplished by iterating
through each country in the `world['features']` array and adding a
property "GDP (2014)" if "Country Code" on the `gdp_dp` Data Package
object matches "ISO_A3" on the given GeoJSON feature.  The value of
"GDP (2014)" is derived from the "Value" column on the `gdp_dp` Data
Package object.

{% highlight python %}
for feature in world['features']:
    matches = [gdp['Value'] for gdp in gdp_dp.resources[0].data if gdp['Country Code'] == feature['properties']['ISO_A3']]
    if matches:
        feature['properties']['GDP (2014)'] = matches[0]
    else:
        feature['properties']['GDP (2014)'] = "None"
{% endhighlight %}

Finally, we can output our consolidated GeoJSON dataset into a new
file called "world_gdp_2014.geojson" using `json.dump` and create a
new Data Package container for it.  For a more thorough walkthrough on
creating a Data Package, please consult the
[Creating Data Packages in Python](/guides/creating-tabular-data-packages-in-python/)
guide.

{% highlight python %}
with open('world_gdp_2014.geojson', 'w') as f:
    json.dump(world, f)
    
new_dp = datapackage.DataPackage()
new_dp.metadata['name'] = 'consolidated-dataset'
new_dp.metadata['resources'] = [
  {
    'name': 'data',
    'path': 'world_gdp_2014.geojson'
  }
]

with open('datapackage.json','w') as f:
    f.write(new_dp.to_json())
{% endhighlight %}

We can rely on GitHub to render our GeoJSON for us.  When you click a
country, it's property list will show up featuring "ADMIN", "ISO_A3",
and the newly added "GDP (2014)" property.

<script src="https://embed.github.com/view/geojson/frictionlessdata/example-data-packages/master/_other_example_files/world_gdp_2014.geojson"></script>

Commit message:

Add static map + cast GDP to float

guides/joining-data-in-python.md, after:

---
title: Joining Data
---

Joining multiple datasets on a common value or set of values is a
common data wrangling task.  For instance, one might have a dataset
listing Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per country and a separate
dataset containing geographic outlines of country borders.  If these
independent datasets have a shared property (for instance, the
three-letter country code as
[defined in ISO 3166-1](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_3166-1_alpha-3)),
we should be able to create one consolidated dataset to generate a map
of GDP per country.  This guide will walk through this simple use
case.

## Example Data

For this example, we are going to use two example Data Packages from
our
[example data packages repository](https://github.com/frictionlessdata/example-data-packages/)
with the properties described above.  The first is an example of Data
Package containing a GeoJSON file.  [GeoJSON](http://geojson.org/) is
a format for representing geographical features in
[JSON](http://json.org/).  This particular GeoJSON file lists
countries on its `features` array and specifies the country code as a
property on each "feature".  In this case, the country code is stored
on the key "ISO_A3" of the feature's `properties` object.

{% highlight json %}
{
  "type": "FeatureCollection",
  "features": [
    {
      "type": "Feature",
      "properties": {
        "ADMIN": "Ukraine",
        "ISO_A3": "UKR"
      },
      "geometry": {
        "type": "Polygon",
        "coordinates": [
        ...
        ]
      }
    }
  ]
}
{% endhighlight %}

The second Data Package is a typical
[Tabular Data Package](/guides/tabular-data-package/) containing a GDP
measure for each country in the world for the year 2014.  Country
codes are stored, naturally, on the "Country Code" column.

|  Country Name                                   | Country Code | Year | Value             |
|-------------------------------------------------+--------------+------+-------------------|
|  Ukraine                                        | UKR          | 2014 | 131805126738.287  |
|  United Arab Emirates                           | ARE          | 2014 | 401646583173.427  |
|  United Kingdom                                 | GBR          | 2014 | 2941885537461.48  |
|  United States                                  | USA          | 2014 | 17419000000000    |
|  Uruguay                                        | URY          | 2014 | 57471277325.1312  |

## Reading and Joining Data 

As in our
[Using Data Packages in Python guide](/guides/using-data-packages-in-python),
the first step before joining is to read the data for each Data
Package onto our computer.  We do this by importing the `datapackage`
library and passing the Data Package url to its `DataPackage` method.
We are also importing the standard Python `json` library to read and
write our GeoJSON file.

{% highlight python %}
import json
import datapackage

countries_url = 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/frictionlessdata/example-data-packages/master/geo-countries/datapackage.json'
gdp_url = 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/frictionlessdata/example-data-packages/master/gross-domestic-product-2014/datapackage.json'

countries_dp = datapackage.DataPackage(countries_url)
gdp_dp = datapackage.DataPackage(gdp_url)
{% endhighlight %}

Our GeoJSON data is stored as a `bytes` object in the `data` attribute
of the first (and only) element of the Data Package `resources` array.
To create our `world` GeoJSON dict, we first need to decode this
`bytes` object to a UTF-8 string and pass it to `json.loads`.

{% highlight python %}
world = json.loads(countries_dp.resources[0].data.decode('utf-8'))
{% endhighlight %}

At this point, joining the data can be accomplished by iterating
through each country in the `world['features']` array and adding a
property "GDP (2014)" if "Country Code" on the `gdp_dp` Data Package
object matches "ISO_A3" on the given GeoJSON feature.  The value of
"GDP (2014)" is derived from the "Value" column on the `gdp_dp` Data
Package object.

{% highlight python %}
for feature in world['features']:
    matches = [gdp['Value'] for gdp in gdp_dp.resources[0].data if gdp['Country Code'] == feature['properties']['ISO_A3']]
    if matches:
        feature['properties']['GDP (2014)'] = float(matches[0])
    else:
        feature['properties']['GDP (2014)'] = 0
{% endhighlight %}

Finally, we can output our consolidated GeoJSON dataset into a new
file called "world_gdp_2014.geojson" using `json.dump` and create a
new Data Package container for it.  For a more thorough walkthrough on
creating a Data Package, please consult the
[Creating Data Packages in Python](/guides/creating-tabular-data-packages-in-python/)
guide.

{% highlight python %}
with open('world_gdp_2014.geojson', 'w') as f:
    json.dump(world, f)
    
new_dp = datapackage.DataPackage()
new_dp.metadata['name'] = 'consolidated-dataset'
new_dp.metadata['resources'] = [
  {
    'name': 'data',
    'path': 'world_gdp_2014.geojson'
  }
]

with open('datapackage.json','w') as f:
    f.write(new_dp.to_json())
{% endhighlight %}

We can now quickly render this GeoJSON file into a
[chloropleth map](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Choropleth_map) using
[QGIS](http://qgis.org/en/site/):

![GDP Map Example](/img/gdp_map_example.png)

Or we can rely on GitHub to render our GeoJSON for us.  When you click
a country, it's property list will show up featuring "ADMIN",
"ISO_A3", and the newly added "GDP (2014)" property.

<script src="https://embed.github.com/view/geojson/frictionlessdata/example-data-packages/master/_other_example_files/world_gdp_2014.geojson"></script>
